- The singleton pattern is the one pattern that I use
almost as much as the factory pattern
and with Spring I'm using that a lot more than I usually had
because everything in Spring is a singleton.
Well almost everything.
So in Spring itself, every bean by default is a singleton.
Unless you tell the application context otherwise,
you're going to get a singleton.
Now one thing to note is that this is not
a classic singleton which is what we're going to discuss,
but it behaves the exact same during
the run time of your application.
Beans, therefore, because they are singletons
must be designed in a way that is thread safe.
And that applies to all singleton classes in general.
So this pattern is relatively straightforward.
You have a class that stores a reference to itself.
More specifically, to an instance of itself.
You have a private constructor.
Then you have a static getInstance method
that returns a reference of self or if self is nul,
it constructs it using the private constructor
and it does so in a thread safe manor.
New is never called on the class
outside of the single getInstance case.
And usually you wrap that with some locking to prevent you
from getting into a non thread safe condition.
Why would we want to use this?
Well first and foremost, this is a much better alternative
in the modern world to using static classes.
Often classes that we define as singletons
are very expensive to create and by doing it this way,
we don't have to incur the creation costs more than once.
We can control concurrency associated with shared resources.
If the resource that we are sharing,
if handled by a singleton, then we can control
all of the access to it and ensure concurrency,
especially when it's not a concurrent system.
And we can use this to store static state
for multiple parts of the application.
And again, this is another use case
where we have to have some thread safe behavior.
Static state is something that we don't want other things
to have access to and manipulate
outside of our normal run time.
So by wrapping it with a singleton class, we can control
who has access to it, when they do and what that state is.
Now I alluded to this a little bit but we're going to
create this in a very straightforward manner.
First and foremost we're going to create a private constructor.
Then, we're going to create an instance handle
and that instance handle is stored in the class.
Then we're going to create a static getInstance method
that uses a synchronized block on the object itself
to reduce the thread safety risks.
Now I do want to make a note.
This does not make a singleton completely thread safe.
You can still get in there and create two instances of it.
However, if you do your object creation during bootstrap,
it is very rare that you would get into this condition
outside of a really strange behavior
and you usually can control that with compensating controls.
Now in that method we will create the instance
if it doesn't exist, again, in that synchronized block.
Now I do want to talk real quick before we jump into
the implementation that in Spring,
you don't have this constructor and instance behavior.
You simply create an object and wrap it with a bean
and if you don't tell it otherwise,
the Spring application context, more specifically,
the bean factory, treats that as a singleton.
No one else calls that constructor within the Spring context
and Spring hands you that instance.
That way everything is done in a thread safe manor
once objects are created
and since Spring controls object creation
within the application context, it gets a really good case
for locking of that behavior.